In this video, we'll learn
about how constructors work
when we use inheritance.
We know that a derived class inherits
data and methods from its base class.
Before c++ can initialize the
derived object, it must initialize
the base part of the derived object.
This makes sense since the derived
class might use base class information
during its own initialization.
So since constructors are responsible
for object initialization, when a
derived object is created, first the
base class constructor executes, and
then the drive constructor executes.
Let's see a simple example
with no args constructors.
In this example we have a base class
that has a no args constructor that
simply displays base constructor.
And we have a derived class that
inherits publicly from base.
The drive class also has a
no args constructor, and it
displays derived constructor.
Now let's create a base class object
and a derived class object and see
how the constructors are called.
Let's create a base object
from the base class.
In this case, there is no inheritance
involved so we expect the base
class constructor to be invoked
and that's exactly what happens.
Now if we create a derived class
object, this is where things change.
In this case, we have
inheritance since the derived
class is a base class.
So c++ initializes the base part
of the derived object first.
And you can see on the right-hand
side of the slide that the base
constructor is invoked first and then
the derived constructor is invoked.
Now let's look at how
destructors are handled.
Class destructors are invoked in the
reverse order as the constructors,
so the derived part of the class must
be destroyed before the base part is.
Again, this makes sense.
So when a derived object is
destroyed, first, the derived
class destructor executes then the
base class destructor executes.
Each destructor should free
any resources that its own
class constructors allocated.
In this slide, we added destructors
to the base and derived classes.
The destructors simply display
base destructor or derived
destructor when they're invoked.
So let's create those two
same base and derived objects
now and see the output.
First, let's look at
the base class object.
In this case, again, we're
not using inheritance at all.
So the output on the right side of
the slide is exactly what we expect.
First, the base constructor is invoked
and then the base destructor is invoked
and the object is destroyed.
Now let's see what happens when
we create a derived object.
First, the derived object must
be initialized, and we know that
the base part must be initialized
before the derived part.
So you can see that the base
constructor is invoked and then
the derived constructor is invoked.
Now when the object is
destroyed the opposite happens.
First, the derived destructor
is invoked, and then the
base destructor is invoked.
This order of construction and
destruction occurs in the same
manner whether you have two classes
or ten classes in the hierarchy.
Finally, let's talk about a few
important topics in inheritance and
what is not inherited automatically?
A derived class does not inherit
base class constructors, base
class destructor, the base
class overloaded assignment
operators and base class friends.
However, we can invoke base class
constructors, destructors and
overloaded assignment operators
from the derived classes.
Sometimes, you'll see a using
base scope operator base directive
in the body of a derived class.
This was introduced in c++11
to allow explicit inheritance
of base class constructors.
There are lots of rules
associated with this.
For example, default copy and move
constructors are not included.
Each inherited constructor has
the same access specifier as its
corresponding base class constructor.
If you provide an overloaded
constructor in the derived class,
then the base class overloaded
constructor is not inherited.
A base class's constructor default
arguments are not inherited.
So you can see, there's a bunch
of rules these are just a few.
However, the using statement can be
useful and save a bit of typing, but
I prefer not to use this feature and
write out the constructors I need
in my derived classes and invoke the
base class constructors as needed.
It isn't that much more typing
and it's very clear to programmers
that come after you to modify your
code exactly what you're doing.
Let's head over to the IDE.
And I'll show you how
this works in live code.
Hello, so I'm in the section
15 workspace,
and I'm in the ConstructorsAndDestructors project.
And what we'll do is we'll step
through the debugger, and we'll
see exactly when these constructors
are called, so we absolutely
understand you know the order
that things happen in and what and
what isn't inherited in this case.
So here I've got a base class that
has an integer, attribute name
value, and it's got a simple, no args
constructor here that sets value to 0.
It's got an overloaded constructor
that expects an integer and sets
the value to that integer, and
it's got a simple destructor.
And all of these, just say,
what they're doing base no
args, base int, base destructor.
We also have a derived class,
which is derived publicly from
base, and it adds its own attribute
doubled value, which is just that
value double two times the value.
And it's got its own constructors here
and destructor, but I've commented
all of them out for now and what we'll
do is we'll uncomment them as we go.
So let's start with
the simple example.
We're here in the main, and
let's create a base object
and we'll just call it b.
Really, really straightforward.
We're not using any
inheritance at all here.
We're not using derived.
We're only dealing with base.
So let's review that, and
make sure that that's very
clear what's going on.
So if I Step through the debugger here
what we've got going on is -- and let
me move this screen over here to the
right so what we've got going on here
is we're right here on line 26, we're
just about to create that base object.
Now what we expect is for the
base no args constructor to be
called to set that value to 0 and
then to display no args, right.
And then when it goes out of scope,
we expect the base d structure
to be called to clean it up.
That's really what we've
seen up to this point in the
course, and it should be pretty
straightforward at this point.
So let's step through and you can see
right now we're on line 26 right here.
As I step through, now I'm
coming up to line 11 which is
our base no args constructor.
It's going to initialize value
to 0, and then just simply
display bass no args constructor.
And that's exactly what happened.
Now b goes out of scope,
so we expect the base class
d structure to be called.
And let me step through here.
There we go, now we're on
line 13, and you can see the
destructor is being called.
And obviously, the value is 0, right.
It was set to 0 by
the constructor here.
So at this point, we get
the destructor called and
our program is complete.
Okay, that's pretty straightforward.
Now what we can do is we can just
change this, just a little bit, and
what we'll do is I'll comment this
out just to keep it in the code so
you guys can play with it on your own.
What we'll do here now is we'll
just say base, we'll call b
again, and this time with a 100.
And I'll move the break
point down to here.
Okay, so now what we're doing is
we're creating a b object, which
is a base class object, and we're
providing the 100 as an initializer.
So what happens here?
Well, in this case, again, we're
not working with derived, yes,
we're not using inheritance.
We expect the overloaded
constructor here on line 12 to
execute which expects an integer.
We expect it to set the value to 100
in this case and then just display
base int overloaded constructor when
the object is -- goes out of scope,
we expect the destructor to be called.
Okay, so let's do that, and we'll
get these these base examples
out of the way, so that we can
definitely work on the derived
examples and understand it better.
Okay, so I'm here on line 27.
I'm going to step through.
Here I am on line 12, that's
exactly what I expected.
I'm providing an integer, so that
overloaded constructor right here
that expects an integer is called.
It's going to initialize value to
100, which is what I'm passing in.
And if I look at b's value, there
you go, you can see the 100.
Now the object goes out of scope, and
the destructor is called right there.
So you can see the base
class destructor was called.
Okay, so that's real simple
examples using base object.
Now let's create some derived objects.
So for our first example what we'll
do is we'll comment that line out.
And what we'll do is we'll just
simply create a derived object, we'll
just call it d, and we'll provide
no initialization information.
So what do we expect to happen?
Well, look at all these
constructors here.
They're all commented out.
So when we don't provide
a constructor, we get a
default constructor, right.
The default no args constructor.
That's going to be called in derived.
But because we're in derived
and it's derived from base, we
need to create our base part.
So automatically, the base
classes default constructor
right here will be called.
So in this case what's going to
happen is that this value will
be set in my base part, but this
double value will never be set
because I'm not using my own
version of this no args constructor.
Okay, so let's run through this one,
and we'll run the debugger here.
And you can see what's going on here.
I'm right on line 28, I'm just
about to create that derived object.
Now obviously, the derived object's default
constructor is going to get called.
It's not here, right.
That's because it's compiler provided.
And it's going to call the
base class constructor.
You can see right there.
You can see how it almost really
just skipped our own default
constructor, the derived class.
It didn't really skip it.
It actually got called.
It's just not doing anything
because it's compiler provided.
So in this case I'm setting value to
0 and saying base no args constructor
right here, and now I'm back.
But now look at the
state that derived is in.
You see derives base has a value
0, right, that's exactly what
we expected because the base
default constructor was called.
But this doubled value was never
set, so I've got garbage here.
Okay, so hopefully that makes sense.
Now what we can do is to
fix this is we can uncomment
out this guy, right here.
So now we've just uncommented
our own no args destructor.
So let's run this again now,
you'll see exactly what happens.
Okay, so now in this case, again,
I'm on line 28, I'm just about
to create that derived object
again with no information here,
no initialization information.
So I'll step through.
This time our own version of our no
args constructor gets called, right.
And what's going to happen right
now is the base constructor
gets called because before I
start executing anything in this
derived constructor, the base
part of me must be initialized.
So you can see when I select
step here now I've invoked that
base class default constructor.
It's going to set value to 0,
and say base no args constructor
then I come back down here to the
constructor, which sets my doubled
value to 0 and then displays that
message that happened kind of
quick I think I double clicked.
So what happens here is
look at my d object now.
The base part is 0 and the
doubled value part is 0.
Okay, so there you can see that
we're really chaining here, and we're
taking care of our own attributes.
And that's what you really want.
You want the base class
to handle its value.
You want the derived class
to handle its doubled value.
Okay, so now let's do
another example here.
And again, I'll comment this out.
So I'll leave it in there so
that you can play with it.
We'll create a derived object d.
And let's pass in a 1000 to it and
I'll move the break point down here.
Okay, so now what do we expect?
Well, we expect our derived classes
overloaded integer constructor to
be called, this guy right here.
It's commented out right now.
So this won't compile, right.
As far as the compiler is concerned,
it doesn't know anything about this.
And remember, these
constructors are not inherited.
If this constructor up here
on line 12 was inherited,
then that would be called.
And we'll force that in a minute.
But for now, let's just compile
this, and you'll see that we do get
a compiler error right here that
says no matching function call.
So basically, it can't find that
constructor because it's not there.
So let's uncomment that out
and tell it that it's there.
Now what do we expect?
Well, now what we expect is when we
execute this line here on line 29,
and we want to create that object.
What's going to happen is the
constructor here on line 21 executes.
But what's going to execute up here?
What we really want is for this guy to
execute, right, this one on line 12,
the overloaded integer constructor.
But that's not going to happen
because I'm not explicitly calling it.
We'll learn how to do
that in the next video.
What's going to happen here
is that the base class default
constructor right here is called.
Okay, so let's walk through this.
Okay, so again, I'm on line 29.
I'm just about to
create that d object.
And you can see now that
line 21 executes, right.
That's my overloaded constructor
that expects an integer.
That's exactly right.
So now the base part of me
needs to be initialized.
The compiler is not going to guess
as to which one of these to call.
So it's simply going to call the no
args version and set that value to 0.
And when I step through this, you can
see right there the no args version
of the constructor is being called.
It's set to value to 0.
You can see right there base
no args, then the derived
constructor gets called and
finishes off by initializing
its double value to two times x.
And if you look right now at the state
of this d object right here, you can
see that the base is indeed 0 because
that constructor took care of it and
the doubled value is two thousand.
We probably wanted the
value to be one 1000, not 0.
But we didn't do that because
we really don't know how to
call these constructors yet.
Like I said, we'll do
that in the next video.
Okay, and then obviously
the destructors get called.
All right, so what if we
didn't have this right here.
I'll comment that out.
We saw that didn't
compile a second ago.
But what we could do is we can
use a using statement, and we
can just say using base base.
And what that will do is it will
allow us to inherit the non-special
constructors from my base class.
And this is a non-special constructor.
You can think of the special
constructors as a default, as a
copy constructor that kind of thing.
So now this will be inherited.
So this line right here what it'll do
is since that's inherited, it matches.
So this will be called.
And again, that has a problem,
right because it's not going to
deal with the double value so let's
run this through the debugger,
and we'll walk through this.
And we're right here now.
We're creating that derived object.
You notice it compiled, right.
Before it didn't compile.
Well, this time it compiled
because I'm inheriting this one.
So it's available in my derive, so
it does match that integer right.
So when I execute this, you'll
see what happens is that this guy
gets called right here on line 12.
There you go.
So control is right here now.
So I'm going to initialize the
base part of me to a 1000, but
now look at the state of d.
My base is correct a 1000,
but my doubled value never got
initialized, right, because
I simply inherited that.
And that's one of the issues with
using automatically inheriting
your non-special constructors.
It'll take care of initializing
the base part of you, but it
won't take care of initializing
the derived part of you.
So you really should do that yourself.
And like I said, we'll learn how to do all that in the next video,
but it's important that you understand this behavior first.
And then I'll just uncomment these last two out
and then you'll see the whole thing happening.
So at this point, let's run this one final time.
So right here we're creating a derived
object d with a 1000 as an initializer.
And what we expect is line 22 to be called,
that's exactly correct.
Now obviously, behind the scenes what's going to happen is
we -- the compiler is not going to guess as to which
constructor to call in the base class.
So it's going to call the no args.
And you can see that happening right here.
That'll set value to 0, display the message,
then we come back and that will set double value to x times 2.
So in this case, you can see I've got 0 and 2000,
again which is not what I want. But then the destructors get
called, and you'll see what happens here.
First, the destructor for the derived gets called,
and then the destructor for the base gets called.
So the destructors happen in the order
opposite from the constructors.
Okay, now this isn't really what we want.
We really would like this to be a 1000,
value a thousand double value 2000.
And like I said, we'll learn
how to do all that in the next video,
when we learn about calling our base class constructors
explicitly from the derived constructors.